First of all, let me get something straight: This is a Journal, not a diary. I know what it says on the cover, but when Mom went out to buy this thing I specifically told her to get one that didn’t say “diary” on it. Great. All I need is for some jerk to catch me
carrying this book around and get the wrong idea.The other thing I want to clear up right away
is that this was mom’s idea, not mine. But if she thinks I’m going to write down my
“feelings” in here or whatever, she’s crazy. So
just don’t expect me to be all “Dear Diary” this
and “Dear Diary” that. The only reason I agreed to do this at all is
because I figure later on when I’m rich and
famous, I'll have better things to do than
answer people's stupid questions all day long. So
this book is gonna come in handy. Like I said, I'll be famous one day, but for now
I'm stuck in middle school with a bunch of morons. Let me just say for the record that I think
middle school is the dumbest idea ever invented.
You got kids like me who haven’t hit their
growth spurt yet mixed in with these gorillas who
need to shave twice a day. And then they wonder why bullying is such a big
problem in middle school. If it was up to me, grade levels would be based
on height, not age. But then again, I guess
that would mean kids like Chirag Gupta would
still be in the first grade. Today is the first day of school, and right now
we’re just waiting around for the teacher to hurry
up and finish the seating chart. So I figured I
might as well write in this book to pass the time. By the way, let me give you some good advice. On
the first day of school, you got to be real careful
where you sit. You walk into the classroom and just
plunk your stuff down on any old desk and the
next thing you know the teacher is saying So in this class, I got stuck with Chris Hosey in
front of me and Lionel James in back of me. Jason Brill came in late and almost sat to my
right, but luckily I stopped that from happening
at the last second. Next period, I should just sit in the middle of a
bunch of hot girls as soon as I step in the
room. But I guess if I do that, it just proves
I didn’t learn anything from last year. Man, I don’t know WHAt is up with girls these
days. It used to be a whole lot simpler back in
elementary school. The deal was, if you were the
fastest runner in your class, you got all the girls. 
 And in the fifth grade, the fastest runner was
Ronnie McCoy. Nowadays, it’s a whole lot more complicated. Now
it’s about the kind of clothes you wear or how rich
you are or if you have a cute butt or whatever.
And kids like Ronnie McCoy are scratching their
heads wondering what the heck happened. The most popular boy in my grade is Bryce
Anderson. The thing that really stinks is that
I have AlWAys been into girls, but kids like
Bryce have only come around in the last couple
of years. I remember how Bryce used to act back in
elementary school. But of course now I don’t get any credit for
sticking with the girls all this time.
Like I said, Bryce is the most popular kid in our
grade, so that leaves all the rest of us guys
scrambling for the other spots.
The best I can figure is that I’m somewhere
around 52nd or 53rd most popular this year.
But the good news is that I’m about to move
up one spot because Charlie Davies is above me,
and he’s getting his braces next week. I try to explain all this popularity stuff to my
friend Rowley (who is probably hovering right
around the 150 mark, by the way), but I think
it just goes in one ear and out the other with him. Today we had Phys Ed, so the first thing I
did when I got outside was sneak off to the
basketball court to see if the Cheese was still
there. And sure enough, it was.
That piece of Cheese has been sitting on the
blacktop since last spring. I guess it must’ve
dropped out of someone’s sandwich or something.
After a couple of days, the Cheese started getting
all moldy and nasty. Nobody would play basketball on
the court where the Cheese was, even though that
was the only court that had a hoop with a net. Then one day, this kid named Darren Walsh
touched the Cheese with his finger, and that’s
what started this thing called the Cheese Touch.
It’s basically like the Cooties. If you get the
Cheese Touch, you’re stuck with it until you pass
it on to someone else. The only way to protect yourself from the
Cheese Touch is to cross your fingers. But it’s not that easy remembering to keep your
fingers crossed every moment of the day. I ended
up taping mine together so they’d stay crossed
all the time. I got a D in handwriting, but it
was totally worth it. This one kid named Abe Hall got the Cheese
Touch in April, and nobody would even come near
him for the rest of the year. This summer Abe
moved away to California and took the Cheese
Touch with him. I just hope someone doesn’t start the Cheese
Touch up again, because I don’t need that kind
of stress in my life anymore.